*From Union Square to Rome*
===========================

**By Dorothy Day**

Silver Spring, Maryland: Preservation

*Summary: An autobiography written as a letter to her brother John.
Conversion story genre of her conversion from Communism to Catholicism.
Compiled from articles in America and Preservation of the Faith.
Discusses Dostoyevsky's influence on her life and the lonely experience
of her conversion Reads as a baptized version of The Eleventh Virgin,
with emphasis on her religious experience throughout her life. Expounds
on such topics as Eucharist, prayer, Marxism, capitalism, free will and
St. Teresa of Avila. (DDLW \#2).*

**CONTENTS**

[INTRODUCTION](daytext.cfm?TextID=200)

Explains she is writing the book to answer her Communist brother and
friend's question: "How could you become a Catholic?"

​1. [WHY](daytext.cfm?TextID=201)

Considers the difficult task of reflecting on her life and recounting
her path to conversion. Some markers along her way included praying the
Psalms, reading Dostoyvsky's and Mauriac's novels, and seeing the love
of the poor found among those who don't consciously accept Christ. Links
her suffering with others to Christ's within His Mystical Body.

​2. [CHILDHOOD](daytext.cfm?TextID=202)

Recounts her first childhood experiences of discovering God in the
Bible, helping others, singing in church, meeting her first Catholic --
". . .I was filled with lofty ambitions to be a saint, a natural
striving, a thrilling recognition of the possibilities of spiritual
adventure."

​3. [EARLY YEARS](daytext.cfm?TextID=203)

Describes her sheltered childhood and her voluminous reading. After
being baptized in the Episcopalian Church and loving the services she
disavows organized religion as her sense of social justice developles.

​4. [COLLEGE](daytext.cfm?TextID=204)

Recounts her loneliness and poverty at college as well as her conscious
turn away from religion. Describes reading Upton Sinclair, Ignazio
Silone, Kropotkin, Tolstoi, and Dostoevsky--the latter two allowing her
to cling to faith in God. Her yearning grows to struggle with the
masses. "Where were the saints to try to change the social order, not
just to minister to the slaves but to do away with slavery?"

​5. [RAYNA PROHME](daytext.cfm?TextID=205)

An account of the deep friendship with Rayna Prohme whose joyousness and
love for truth deeply impressed her. Although Rayna died a Communist,
she is counted among those who belong "to the invisible unity of the
Church."

​6. [REPORTING](daytext.cfm?TextID=206)

Recounts the misery of New York in 1916, her loneliness, and life in
tenements among the ethnic poor. Describes her first newspaper job with
*The Call*, the competing social ideologies, and sporadic strikes and
protests.

​7. [NEW YORK](daytext.cfm?TextID=207)

Describes her life as an advocacy journalist depicting the misery of the
poor and working class. Engages in picketing, organizing, and
anti-conscription activities. An account of being jailed with
suffragettes and their hunger strike. Theme of being "tormented by God"
and impulses toward faith recurs.

​8. [THE RIGOROUS LIFE](daytext.cfm?TextID=208)

Describes her year as a nursing student--the long hours, fatigue, and
the discipline it brought into her life. She admires the Catholic faith
of another student and attends Sunday Mass with her. After a year she
realizes "my real work was writing and propaganda" and leaves the
hospital for Chicago.

​9. [CHICAGO](daytext.cfm?TextID=209)

Recounts her involvement with the I. W. W. in Chicago and, in some
detail, an accidental jail experience. After a move to New Orleans she
starts to make "visits" to Church. With the money from selling a book
she wrote, she buys a beach house, enters into a common law marriage,
and begins to "read and think and ponder, and I notice from my notebooks
that it was at this time that I began to pray more earnestly."

​10. [PEACE](daytext.cfm?TextID=210)

A vivid description of the bucolic life in the beach house on Staten
Island. Elaborates on her growing faith and life of prayer, spurred on
by the beauty, stillness, and knowledge she is pregnant.

​11. [NEW LIFE](daytext.cfm?TextID=211)

An account of her final conversion after the birth of her daughter
Theresa. She describes the struggle and anguish she felt while preparing
for her and Theresa's Baptism--knowing her decision would end her
relationship with her agnostic husband.

​12. [WHEAT AND COCKLE](daytext.cfm?TextID=212)

Answers the question as to how she rejected Communism. In spite of
Communism's good ideals and the faults of Christians, she repudiates
Communism as a heresy and rejects its resort to violence in class
struggle.

​13. [YOUR THREE OBJECTIONS](daytext.cfm?TextID=213)

Answers three objections of her brother to her faith: that religion is
morbid, the Catholic belief in the presence of Christ in the Eucharist,
and the problem of evil. Relies on St. Theresa of Avila, St. John of the
Cross, and the scriptures to elaborate her faith and love of God.
