% Our Country Passes From Undeclared To Declared War" 
% Dorothy Day

*The Catholic Worker*, January 1942, 1, 4.

*Summary: Reaffirms her pacifism based on the Sermon on the Mount, the
words of Christ to "love your enemies." Urges non-participation in war
related activities and continuation of the works of mercy. Affirms her
love of country and asks for constant prayer and fasting. She knows not
everyone agrees with her but asks forbearance and mutual charity.
Keywords: conscientious objection, prayer. (DDLW \#379).*

In Addition to the Weapons of Starvation of Its Enemy, Our Country Is
Now Using the Weapons of Army, Navy and Air Force--\
In a Month of Great Feasts, a Time of Joy in Christian Life, the World
Plunges Itself Still Deeper Into the Horror of War

Dear Fellow Workers in Christ:\
      Lord God, merciful God our Father, shall we keep silent or shall
we speak? And if we speak, what shall we say?\
      I am sitting here in the church on Mott Street writing this in
your presence. Out on the streets it is quiet, but You are there too, in
the Chinese, in the Italians, these neighbors we love. We love them
because they are our brothers, as Christ is our Brother and God our
Father.\
      But we have forgotten so much. We have all forgotten. And how can
we know unless you tell us. "'For whoever calls upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved.' How then are they to call upon him whom they have
not believed? But how are they to believe Him whom they have not heard?
And how are they to hear, if no one preaches? And how are men to preach
unless they be sent? As it is written, 'How beautiful are the feet of
those who preach the gospel of peace.'" Romans X.\
      Seventy-five thousand *Catholic Workers* go out every month. What
shall we print? We can print still what the Holy Father is saying, when
he speaks of total war, of mitigating the horrors of war, when he speaks
of cities of refuge; of feeding Europe. . . .\
      We will print the words of Christ who is with us always, even to
the end of the world. "Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
and pray for those who persecute and calumniate you, so that you may be
children of your Father in Heaven, who makes his sun rise on the good
and the evil, and sends rain on the just and the unjust.\
      We are at war, a declared war, with Japan, Germany and Italy. But
still we can repeat Christ's words, each day, holding them close in our
hearts, each month printing them in the paper. In times past Europe has
been a battlefield. But let us remember St. Francis, who spoke of peace
and we will remind our readers of him, too, so they will not forget.\
      In the *Catholic Worker* we will quote our Pope, our saints, our
priests. We will go on printing the articles of Father Hugo who reminds
us today that we are "called to be saints," that we are others Christs,
reminding us of the priesthood of the laity.\
      We are still pacifists. Out manifesto is the Sermon on the Mount,
which means that we will try to be peacemakers. Speaking for many of our
conscientious objectors, we will not participate in armed warfare or in
making munitions or by buying government bonds to prosecute the war, or
in urging others to these efforts.\
      But neither will we be carping in our criticism. We love our
country and we love our President. We have been the only country in the
world where men of all nations have taken refuge from oppression. We
recognize while in the order of intention we have tried to stand for
peace, for love of our bother, in the order of execution we have failed
as Americans in living up to our principles.\
      We will try daily, hourly, to pray for an end to the war, such an
end, to quote Father Orchard (Oct. 28 *Commonweal*) "as would manifest
to all the world, that it was brought about by divine action, rather
than by military might or diplomatic negotiation, which men and nations
would then only attribute to their power or sagacity."\
      "Despite all calls to prayer," Father Orchard concludes, "There is
at present all to little indication anywhere that the tragedy of
humanity and the desperate need of the world have moved the faithful,
still less stirred the thoughtless masses, to turn to prayer as the only
hope for mankind this dreadful hour.\
      "We shall never pray until we feel more deeply, and we shall never
feel deeply enough until we envisage what is actually happening in the
world, and understand what is possible in the will of God; and that
means until sufficient numbers realize that we have brought things to
pass which is beyond human power to help or save.\
      "Those who do feel and see, however inadequately, should not
hesitate to begin to pray, or fail to persevere, however dark the
prospects remain.\
      "Let them urge others to do likewise; and then, first small
groups, and then the Church as a whole, and at last the world, may turn
and cry for forgiveness, mercy and deliverance for all.\
      "Then we may be sure God will answer, and effectually; for the
Lord's hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor His ear heavy that
it cannot hear."\
      Let us add, that unless we combine this prayer with almsgiving, in
giving to the least of God's children; and fasting in order that we may
help feed the hungry; and penance in recognition of our share in the
guilt, our prayer may become empty words.\
      Our works of mercy may take us into the midst of war. As editor of
the *Catholic Worker*, I would urge our friends and associates to care
for the sick and wounded, to the growing of food for the hungry, to the
continuance of all our works of mercy in our houses and on our farms. We
understand, of course, that there is and there will be great differences
of opinion even among our own groups as to how much collaboration we can
have with the government in times like these. There are differences more
profound and there will be many continuing to work with us from
necessity, or from choice, who do not agree with us as to our position
on war, conscientious objection, etc. But we beg that there will be
mutual charity and forbearance among us all.\
      This letter, sent to our Houses of Hospitality and to all our
farms, and being printed in the January issue of the paper, is to state
our position in this most difficult time.\
      Because of our refusal to assist in the prosecution of war and our
insistence that our collaboration be one for peace, we may find
ourselves in difficulties. But we trust in the generosity and
understanding of our government and our friends, to permit us to
continue, to use our paper to "preach Christ crucified."\
      And may the Blessed Mary, Mother of beautiful love, and of fear,
and of knowledge, and of holy hope, pray for us.\
      Sincerely yours in Christ, The Editors.
